There's that song again, drifting up off the water. Settle in, little one — new here or back for the hundredth morning, you're welcome the same. I'm Old Timber.
Today, my friends, I want to ask you something. Have you ever met somebody brand new — who did things differently than you? Said hello in a way you'd never heard? And here's the real question: how did you treat them, that first minute?
God made fast creatures and slow ones, and a world of ways to say hello. And once, on a cool morning, a traveller came down from the high country — and one of our quickest friends zipped right past her. The answer's in the story.
It was a bright, cool morning by the creek — and up the path, slow and careful in a soft grey coat, came someone nobody had ever seen. I'll let her tell you her name.
Um... somebody's coming. I can hear her. ...Soft little feet. She's been walking a good while.
She stopped at the reeds, took a breath — and instead of speaking, she hummed. And quick as a sneeze, in darted Zippy the hummingbird.
Mm-hmm-hmmm. ...That means hello. Where I come from, you hum first, and you wait. I'm Quilla. I came down from the cold rocks, way up high. I... I brought a little gift. A smooth pebble. It's how we say, I'm glad to meet you.
Newcomer! Hi — hi! Okay so, welcome-tour, I've got it scheduled, four stops, ninety seconds each, the pond, the oak, the footbridge, the berry patch, optimal route, we leave NOW — keep up, everyone!
Stop five! I added a stop! The OTHER side of the pond! Stop six! A snack break — eight seconds, chew fast!
...She's still humming, you know. ...The newcomer. ...Hello number one. Still waiting.
And off she zipped. But Quilla just stood there, pebble in her paw, her hum trailing off — and tucked the stone quietly away. And over crashed Bongo the bear cub, with Garingo the parrot up in the branches.
A pebble! For ME? Aw — wait, was it for me? I'll hold it! I'm GREAT at holding things! I got this!
BEHOLD! A WAYFARER from the FAR PEAKS, arrived at OUR humble water! Friends, we must throw a FEAST! A PARADE! A nine-act welcoming PAGEANT with myself in the leading
A PARADE! I'll be the front! ...What's a pageant? ...Is it snacks?
And slow from the reeds came Shelly the tortoise — wise young Shelly. She looked at the fuss, and the empty space where Zippy had been, and said,
...She hummed. Nobody hummed back.
A PAGEANT it is, then! I shall compose the OPENING ODE — 'O Wayfarer of the Frosty Crags' — in fourteen verses, with INTERPRETIVE WING-WORK
...Or we could say hi back.
...I still have the pebble. ...Should I have the pebble?
Now, the high country gets cold when the sun slides down — and Quilla had no warm bedding for the night. So Bongo had a big idea.
We'll climb HIGH! Up to the cold rocks for the soft moss — the warm kind — so Quilla's got a cozy bed! It's the friendly thing! I got this — okay, maybe I don't know the WAY, but I got the SPIRIT!
Wait — does the high country have SNACKS? ...Not for me! For QUILLA! ...Okay also a little for me.
BEHOLD — an EXPEDITION! I shall document our HEROISM for the creek-songs! ...From the back. Where the view is. And the safety.
I have also brought a CONTINGENCY ODE. For if the first ode fails.
I'll carry the moss! And the snacks! And Quilla, if she gets tired! And the snacks! ...I said snacks twice.
I'll carry the MAP too! ...and the snacks! ...and — whoop — ...okay the snacks just rolled down the hill.
Ooh — a rescue mission with a DEADLINE, my favorite kind! I'll do the math, I'll do the route, I'll do the towing — Quilla, you just hang on and try to keep up with the EXPERT!
Okay — okay. I'll lead. Fastest route, I've mapped it, switchback-grade four-point-two, we shave eleven minutes if nobody DAWDLES — Quilla, you're slow, just hold my tailfeather and I'll TOW you, problem solved, let's GO
...You have a... a number for the path? ...Where I'm from, the path is just the path. You walk it. ...Slowly.
Oh — no, that's... I don't go fast. Up high you go slow, or the thin air gets you. I was going to hum the climbing-song, it helps the breathing, it's — ...it's how we do it.
Greatslowsongs-later! Movemovemove!
And up the path they went — Zippy out front, Bongo crashing after, Garingo announcing his own bravery.
Re-routing! Straight UP the cliff face — saves forty seconds, gravity's basically a suggestion — Quilla, can you climb sheer rock? ...No? ...Fine. I'll allow ONE switchback. ONE.
...Where I'm from, if you arrive out of breath, you arrived too early. ...Nobody up high is in a hurry. The air won't let them.
Keep up, Quilla! You're gonna LOVE the moss, it's the SOFTEST — c'mon, big legs, little legs, everybody!
I shall narrate the ASCENT from this commanding position! ...which is the rear. ...the very rear. ...where the snacks are.
Um... Quilla? ...You're looking back the way you came. ...Are you... thinking about going home?
...Maybe. I came all this way to make a new friend. But nobody waits for the way I say hello. Perhaps I just go back up where the hellos are slow. Where I know how.
...Don't go yet. ...I heard your hum. ...I'll wait, if you teach me.
And way up ahead, Zippy never once turned round to see one of her party thinking of leaving for good. She didn't know. But you do, little ones.
Um... I packed snacks too. ...Just in case Bongo's run out. ...He's already eaten one.
Now — up they climbed, past the last trees, to the bare grey rocks where the wind has a cold edge. And here's the strange thing, little ones: the high air goes thin — hard for big lungs, and very hard for little wings.
High country? Pfft. I do high country before BREAKFAST. Watch the expert. Wing-power, baby
Okay so I'll just — go quicker. Speed always works. Watch — ...up, up, and — ...huh. Why am I back DOWN. I went up and the air just... handed me back.
Fine. Harder. Double-time, beat the little wings like a drum — c'mon — ...it's not CATCHING. The air's too thin to push on.
...The air is winning. The AIR is winning. I have never lost to AIR.
Okay — plan. I'll build a little ladder of gusts and ride up the steps. Step one, step two, step — ...oh. ...That's not a step. That's a wall. The air is just a wall.
Keep UP, Zippy! You're always out front — quit dawdling back there!
Onward, SEEKERS! The summit awaits! Do try to keep PACE, small one!
...The air is THIN up here. My DRAMATIC PROJECTION is suffering. Nobody can hear my ODE. This is a TRAGEDY in itself.
...The others are gone. I can hear them up there. 'Keep up, Zippy.' ...I'm the one who can't keep up. ...Me. That's new.
And the one who IS the buzz, most days, sat down on a cold grey rock. Stone-still. And up ahead, they kept climbing. And nobody waited.
Now — down at the pond's muddy edge, three small frogs had felt the whole morning ripple through the water. The Mudpuppies. Splosh declared,
Mudpuppies! I have FELT it in the mud. The fast one's gone up too high. And mark my words — the NEW one... the slow one... will be the one who saves her.
...Wait. Was that RIGHT? That sounded right. Splosh, I think you said a TRUE thing.
AND ALSO — nah. Too easy. Take it back. The mud says it means the new one is secretly a CLOUD.
Like a bell. On a cold rock. ...A CLOUD. Yes. Forget the saving thing. We never said the saving thing.
Mm. They said the truest thing of the morning... and threw it back in the pond. First — somebody's alone on a cold rock. And somebody's about to find her.
MUSIC-UNDERSCORE. So there she sat — the fastest friend at the creek, on a cold grey rock, in the thin air, with nobody slowing down for her.
Nobody waited for me. ...I called, and I called. And they just... kept going up without me.
And it feels small. And cold. And like maybe I should just go back down where things are easy and fast and I'm good at them.
...Oh. ...That's what Quilla felt. This morning. When I zipped right past her hum. When I didn't take her little pebble.
I did this to her. The exact thing. And I didn't even slow down enough to SEE it. ...God, I was the fast one this morning. ...And now I'm the lost one. ...And it turns out fast doesn't mean a thing up here. Not one thing.
And just then — soft feet on cold stone. Quilla had felt the buzz go quiet, and turned back. The slow new one, coming down for the fast lost one. She sat beside Zippy, and did the one thing nobody had done all day. She waited.
...Hey. ...You don't have to talk. Breathe slow with me. Up here, slow IS fast. ...Here — hum it with me. Three up, two down. ...That's the climbing-song. That's how we get home.
...mm-hmm-hmmm. ...It's working. The slow thing is actually working. ...Quilla — I went right past you this morning. Past your hum, past your pebble, like you weren't even there. I'm sorry. I truly am.
...I know. ...And you came back to it. That's the part that counts. ...Now hum. We've got a mountain to walk down — slow.
Slow and steady, the two came down — humming the climbing-song the whole way — and met the others, who'd finally noticed they were two friends short.
ZIPPY! Quilla! We turned around and you were GONE and I thought — okay I'll carry you BOTH, one on each arm, I got this — ...okay, maybe two-at-once is a lot. But I'm SO glad you're here.
BEHOLD — ...no. ...Not behold. Friends, I planned a nine-act pageant for a guest... and never once asked the guest if she wanted a pageant. I should write that down. I am, I think, growing.
Um... Quilla taught me the hum. ...Can we all do it? For her? ...Three up, two down. ...One, two...
...Finally. ...Somebody hummed back.
...You all hummed. ...Oh. ...That's the best hello I ever got. Thank you. ...And the moss — for my bed — we did get the moss, right?
I get it now. ...When you're new, and everybody's faster, and nobody waits — it's the loneliest feeling in the world. I felt it for ten minutes. Quilla felt it all morning. I'm never doing that to anybody again. Ever.
Right. The moss. ...This time, we get it Quilla's way. Slow. ...I'll go last.
Well — by evening we were back by the pond, Quilla snug in her warm new moss. And I had one question for our quickest friend. Zippy — up on that cold rock, when nobody slowed down... what did you wish they'd do?
...I wished somebody would WAIT. Just a second. Just SEE me. ...And that's the thing, isn't it — that's exactly what I'd want. So that's what you give. You give the new one the very thing you'd want... if you were the new one. Even when you're in a hurry. ESPECIALLY then.
Um... and you don't have to know somebody's way yet. ...You just have to wait long enough to learn it. ...God made a whole world of different hellos. ...The kind thing is to listen for theirs.
Mm. There's the heart of it — and you found it yourselves, the two of you. Treat the new one the way you'd want treating, if you were the new one.
Now — a teacher named Jesus put that very thing into words, once, for a great crowd sitting on a hillside. The words got written down, and you'll still find them in the Bible. They go like this.
And as ye would that men should do to you, do ye also to them likewise.
As ye would that men should do to you. The way you'd want to be treated — do that, for them. Just like a fast hummingbird, learning a slow hello.
Mm. And now — Professor Hoot's Totally True Facts, where the most certain owl at the creek shares one fact he's completely sure of.
Good evening. A fact, children, that is entirely true — and tied, you'll note, to our traveller who came such a very long way. Sea turtles return to the exact beach where they were born to lay their own eggs — sometimes after crossing thousands of miles of open ocean. And they navigate by the Earth's own magnetic field. Navigate — that simply means: they find their way. No map. No path. They feel the pull of the planet itself, like a tug toward home, and they follow it across the whole wide sea. A fact, established beyond dispute. Good evening.
Mm. A fine fact, Professor — and a true one. You bring the wonder; I'll look after the why of things. That's our deal.
And before we go — up come the Mudpuppies, with a question of their very own. Splish, Splash, and Splosh: three frogs, one enormous question. Here come the Mudpuppy Minutes.
Today on Mudpuppy Minutes, we will explain... why grass is GREEN.
Easy. The grass is green because it is JEALOUS of the trees. Green with envy. Famous fact.
AND ALSO — the grass drinks up the SUN, and the sun-drink is what turns it green! It keeps the leftover green light for itself! Probably!
Oh no, no — too easy. That can't be right. Take it back, Splash. Grass is green because the POND paints it every night while we sleep. With a tiny brush.
...Wait. Is it just the sun-drink thing Splash said? ...That felt true.
...Nah.
Mudpuppies — we have solved it. Grass is green because the pond paints it with a tiny brush. Like a bell. On a cold rock.
Mm. Now hear me, little ones — the grass isn't jealous, and no pond paints it. Grass is green because of a tiny green thing inside each leaf — chlorophyll — and its job is to catch the sunlight and turn it into food. The green IS the catching. That's the real why. Though I'll let the frogs keep their paintbrush.
And that's the day a traveller came down from the high country with a hum and a little stone — and the fastest friend at the creek learned to slow down and hum it back.
So this is Old Timber. Until the next breeze brings us together, my friends. And little ones — next time somebody new says hello in a way you've never heard... hum it right back.
See you next time... somewhere in Shiloh Creek.